

A flexible Software Architecture for Presentation Layers
demonstrated on Medical Documentation with Episodes
and Inclusion of Topological Report


Jens Bohl <info@jens-bohl.de>,
Christian Heller <christian.heller@tu-ilmenau.de>,
Torsten Kunze <info@torstenkunze.de>,
Ilka Philippow <ilka.philippow@tu-ilmenau.de>


Technical University of Ilmenau
Faculty for Computer Science and Automation
Institute for Theoretical and Technical Informatics
PF 100565, Max-Planck-Ring 14, 98693 Ilmenau, Germany
http://www.tu-ilmenau.de, fon: +49-(0)3677-69-1230, fax: +49-(0)3677-69-1220


Abstract

This document describes how existing design patterns can be combined to merge
their advantages into one domain- independent software framework. This framework,
called Cybernetics Oriented Programming (CYBOP), is characterized by flexibility
and extensibility. Further, the concept of Ontology is used to structure the
software architecture as well as to keep it maintainable. A Component Lifecycle
ensures the proper startup and shutdown of any systems built on top of CYBOP.

The practical proof of these new concepts was accomplished within the diploma
thesis of Jens Bohl which consisted of designing and developing a module called
Record, of the Open Source Software (OSS) project Res Medicinae. The major task
of this module is to provide a user interface for creating medical documentation.
New structure models such as Episodes were considered and implemented. In this
context, the integration of a graphical tool for Topological Documentation was
also highly demanded. The tool allows documentation with the help of anatomical
images and the setting of markers for pathological findings.

Keywords. Design Pattern, Framework, Component Lifecycle, Ontology,
CYBOP, Res Medicinae, Episode Based Documentation, Topological Documentation


1 Introduction

Quality of software is often defined by its maintainability, extensibility and
flexibility. Object Oriented Programming (OOP) should help to achieve
these goals -- but this wasn't possible by only introducing another programming
paradigm.

So, major research objectives are to find concepts and principles to increase
the reusability of software architectures and the resulting code. Frameworks
shall prevent code duplication and development efforts. Recognizing recurring
structures means finding Design Patterns for application on similar problems.
These two concepts -- frameworks and design patterns -- depend on each other and
provide a higher flexibility of software components [Pre94].

The aim of this work was to find suitable combinations of design patterns to
compose a framework that is characterized by a strict hierarchical architecture.
Everything in universe is organized within a hierarchy of elements -- the human
body for example consists of organs, organs consist of regions, regions consist
of cells and so on. This very simple idea can also be mapped on software
architectures -- and basically, this is what this document is about.

What kind of techniques to realize such a concept of strict hierarchy does software
engineering provide? The following chapters first introduce common design patterns
and the lifecycle of components as templates for own ideas and then show how the
resulting framework Cybernetics Oriented Programming (CYBOP) [cyb04] is designed.


2 Design Principles

2.1 Essential Design Patterns

Design patterns [EG95] are elements of reusable software. They can be
used for solving recurrent design problems and are recommendations on how to build
software in an elegant way. With the help of these patterns, software shall be
more extensible, flexible and easy to maintain with respect to future enhancements.
The following patterns are essential within CYBOP.


2.1.1 Composite

This design pattern (figure 1) allows creating tree-like object structures.
One object is child of another object and has exactly one parent. This pattern
is often used to realize Whole-Part relations: one object is Part of another one.

Fig. 1: Composite Pattern


2.1.2 Layers

With the help of this pattern, software can be organized in horizontal layers
(figure 2). Modules and applications can be separated into logical levels,
whereby these levels should be as independent from each other as possible,
to ensure a high substitutability.

Fig. 2: Layer Pattern


2.1.3 Chain Of Responsibility

Messages initiated by a particular object can be sent over a chain of instances
to the receiving object (figure 3). So, either the message will be transmitted
over a bunch of objects or evaluated immediately by the target object.

Fig. 3: Chain Of Responsibility Pattern


2.1.4 Model-View-Controller

Dividing the presentation layers into the logical components Model,
View and Controller, is a very approved way for designing software
for user interfaces. The model encapsulates the data presented by the view and
manipulated by the controller (figure 4).

Fig. 4: Model-View-Controller Pattern


2.1.5 Hierarchical Model-View-Controller

The Hierarchical Model-View-Controller [JC00] combines the essential design
patterns Composite, Layers, and Chain of Responsibility into one conceptual
architecture (figure 5). It consists of hierarchical layers containing MVC-Triads.
These triads conventionally separate the presentation layer into model, view and
controller. Triads communicate with each other by relating over the controller object.

Here is a short explanation of this concept, using a practical example:
The upper-most triad could represent a dialog, the middle one a container such as
a panel. In this container, a third triad -- for example a button -- can be held.
All Triads communicate with each other by using the controller component. The
basic idea behind this concept is to divide the presentation layer into hierarchical
sections.

Fig. 5: Hierarchical Model-View-Controller Pattern


2.2 Component Lifecycle

Each Component lives in a system that is responsible for the component's
creation, destruction etc. When talking about components, this article sticks
to the definition of Apache-Jakarta-Avalon [jak02], which considers
components to be a passive entity that performs a specific role.

A component has a number of methods which need to be called in a certain order.
The order of method calls is what is known as Component Lifecycle.
An outside, active entity is responsible for calling the lifecycle methods
in the right order. In other words, such an entity or Component Container
can control and use the component. The Avalon documentation [jak02] says:

"It is up to each container to indicate which lifecycle methods it will honor.
This should be clearly documented together with the description of the container."


3 An Extended Component Lifecycle

The CYBOP lifecycle of components is an extension of the lifecycle idea of Apache
-- basically the same idea but another background and realization.

All Whole-Part associations between objects were organized under the rules
of the component lifecycle. Analogous to the lifecycle of organic cells, the
relations were created and destroyed in a sequence of lifecycle steps. These
steps are realized as method calls on the components (figure 6).

Fig. 6: State Diagram of CYBOB's Component Lifecycle


4 Ontology

An ontology is a catalogue of types that are depending on each other in hierarchical
order. It is a formal specification concerning a particular objective. CYBOP
consists of three such ontologies:

- Basic Ontology
- Model Ontology
- System Ontology

Figure 7 shows the model ontology. The layer super types are Record, Unit, Heading
and Description. These classes are super types of all classes in a particular
ontological level.

The right side shows a concrete implementation of the model ontology -- the
Electronic Health Record [ope04]. This data structure contains all
information concerning a particular patient. The figure shows Problem types
in level Unit. These consist of episodes containing instances of
PartialContact. In level Heading, the structural elements of a partial
contact can be found -- Subjective, Objective, Assessment and
Plan. Therapeutical issues are placed in level Description -- such as
Medication with particular dose.

Fig. 7: Model Ontology

As shown, the concept of ontology can be used to organize data structures in
a hierarchical order by defining logical layers with super types.


5 CYBOP

Section 2 introduced essential design patterns that represent the main structure
of the CYBOP framework. Section 3 explained the Component Lifecycle and section 4
the well-known idea of ontology. Now these design principles and conceptual
architectures will be combined to comprise their advantages and to increase the
demanded quality characteristics: high flexibility and maintainability.

Structure by Hierarchy -- this is the basic idea behind CYBOP. Extending
the concept of Hierarchical Model-View-Controller to whole software architectures,
CYBOP was designed to be the domain-independent backbone for information systems
of any kind. Originally designed for medical purposes, it should also be usable
for insurance, financial or any other standard applications in future.


5.1 Class Item

As shown, tree-like structures can be realized by the Composite pattern. In
CYBOP, this pattern can be found simplified in class Item (figure 8) which is
super type of all other classes. References, respectively relations to child
elements are held within a hashmap. No attributes were used except of this hashmap.
Every element of the map can be accessed by a special key value. So, no particular
get- or set-methods were needed for attributes.

Fig. 8: Class Item


5.2 Basic Structure

Comprising the design patterns Composite, Layers, and Chain of Responsibility,
the CYBOP framework is comparable to a big tree containing objects organized
in different levels. Figure 9 shows the object tree and the different levels
of granularity.

Fig. 9: Basic Structure


6 Record -- An EHR Module

The practical background for the application of CYBOP is Res Medicinae [res04].
A modern clinical information system is the aim of all efforts in this project.
In future, it shall serve medical documentation, archiving, laboratory work etc.
Res Medicinae is separated into single modules depending on different tasks.

One of these modules is Record -- an application for documenting medical
information (figure 10). In addition to new documentation models, it also contains
a tool for topological documentation.

Fig. 10: Screenshot of Record [urb02]

Starting from an overall view of the human body, it is possible to reach every
organ or region of the body in detail (figure 11).

Fig. 11: Excerpt from Topological Structure of Human Skeleton


7 Summary

Software design patterns are essential elements of frameworks. They can be
combined to comprise their advantages and to realize hierarchical structures.
These structures can be created and destroyed in the lifecycle of components.
In that lifecycle, object relations become more transparent and are easier to
control and to maintain.

Ontologies can help to model particular domains and to layer software. Every level
of these ontologies has a particular supertype, whereby these types depend on each
other by inheritance. This concept supports the modelling and logical separation
of software into hierarchical architectures. The granularity of the ontology
(number of ontological levels) can be adapted to particular requests.

By applying the new concepts introduced in this document, the quality of software
can be greatly increased. The time for building systems can be reduced to a minimum.
The clear architecture avoids common confusion as the systems grow.


8 Acknowledgements

Our special thanks go to all Enthusiasts of the Open Source Community who have
provided us with a great amount of knowledge through a comprising code base to
build on. We'd also like to acknowledge the contributors of Res Medicinae,
especially all medical doctors who supported us with their analysis work
[CH04] and specialised knowledge in our project mailing lists.
Further on, great thanks goes to the Urban and Fischer publishing company, for
providing anatomical images from their Sobotta -- Atlas der Anatomie.


9 References

[CH04] CHRISTIAN HELLER, KARSTEN HILBERT, ROLAND COLBERG ET AL.:
Analysedokument zur Erstellung eines Informationssystems fuer den Einsatz in der Medizin. 
http://www.resmedicinae.org/model/analysis, 2001-2004

[cyb04] CYBOP - Cybernetics Oriented Programming. http://www.cybop.net, 2002-2004

[EG95] ERICH GAMMA, RICHARD HELM, RALPH JOHNSON UND JOHN VLISSIDES (GANG OF FOUR):
Design Patterns. Elements of reusable object oriented Software.
Addison-Wesley, Bonn, Boston, Muenchen, 1 , 1995. http://www.aw.com

[jak02] Apache Jakarta Avalon Framework, Web Server and Applications.
http://jakarta.apache.org, 2002

[JC00] JASON CAI, RANJIT KAPILA, GAURAV PAL: HMVC:
The layered pattern for developing strong client tiers. July 2000

[ope04] OpenEHR - Design Principles Document. http://www.openehr.org, 2001-2004

[Pre94] PREE, W.: Meta Patterns - A Means for Capturing the Essentials of
Reusable Object-Oriented Design. Proceedings of ECOOP '94, 150-162, 1994

[res04] Res Medicinae - Medical Information System. http://www.resmedicinae.org, 1999-2004

[urb02] Anatomical Images from Sobotta: Atlas der Anatomie, 2002. http://www.urbanfischer.de


